# Crypto Learnings
Personal notes created while reading about crypto

## Contents
- Block Cipher Modes
    - Confidentiality only
        - ECB (Electronic Codebook)
        - CBC (Cipher Block Chaining)
        - OFB (Output Feedback)
        - CTR (Counter)
    - Confidentiality & Authentication
        - CCM
        - CWC
        - GCM

- Generation of Initialization Vector (IV)
    - Static
    - Counter
    - Random
    - Nonce generated

- Order of encryption and authentication
    - Encrypt-then-MAC (EtM)
    - Encrypt-and-MAC (E&M)
    - MAC-then-Encrypt (MtE)

## Block Cipher Modes
- A block cipher mode is an encrypting function used when more than just one block of data is to be processed.
- Think of it as a wrapper around the actual block cipher alogrithm.
- Why is it required? Because if no cipher mode is used, a plaintext ABC will encrypt to the same ciphertext XYZ for a single key.
- How is that a problem? Given our everyday communications are not truely random (for example, packet headers, misc data that repeats in a typical internet exchange (say the sender's ID in a whatsapp group chat)), we do not want to leak the information that some particular data is being repeated.
- Block cipher modes are divided into the ones providing confidentiality only and the ones providing confidentiality and authentication

### Block Ciphers providing confidentiality only

#### EBC (Electronic CodeBook)
- _Electronic Codebook_ mode is the simplest to understand of all block cipher modes.
- Basically, `C[i] = E(K, P[i])` for all i=1...N blocks of data.
- Insecure, should never be used.

#### CBC (Cipher Block Chaining)
- _Cipher Block Chaining_ is what it sounds like, we chain the ciphers in some way.
-  Previous block's ciphertext is xor'd with the current plaintext block before encryption.
- `C[i] = E(K, C[i-1] ⊕ P[i])` where ⊕ represents the xor or exclusive-or operation.
- The issue here is getting the first ciphertext block. Generally, an Initialization Vector. 
- Initialization Vectors may be static (Same IV used everytime), counter (Incremented upon every use) or random (randomly generated upon every use). Details in initialization vector section.

#### OFB (Output Feedback)
- _Output Feedback_ mode uses the block cipher to generate a key stream and ⊕s the key stream with the message
- Works like a stream cipher, as in a stream of pseudo random bits is ⊕'d with the plaintext to generate ciphertext
- `K[i] = E(K, K[i-1])` for all i=1...N and ciphertext block `C[i] = K[i] ⊕ P[i]`
- Initialization vector is used for the very first block.
- Decryption is the exact same as encryption.
- No padding is required.
- IV should not be repeated

#### CTR (Counter)
- _Counter_ mode is similar to OFB, in that it is a stream cipher mode
- Defined by `K[i] = E(K, Nonce + i)` for i=1...N and `C[i] = P[i] ⊕ K[i]` where Nonce stands for _number used once_ and it is just that, and _i_ is the counter value.
- No padding is required
- Nonce should never be repeated

### Block Ciphers providing authentication & confidentiality

#### CCM
#### CWC
#### GCM

## Order of encryption and authentication

#### Encrypt then MAC (EtM)
- Encrypt the plain text, then authenticate the ciphertext
- Applying MAC to weak encryption scheme fixes it
- More efficient in discarding bogus messages as overhead to decrypt bogus messages is avoided

#### Encrypt & MAC (E&M)
- Encryption and MAC can happen in parallel
- MAC is that of plaintext, hence any weakness in MAC algorithm can leak information about the plaintext itself.

#### MAC then Encrypt (MtE)
- MAC the plaintext and appeand it to the plaintext
- Encrypt the plaintext and MAC
- Does not expose the MAC value to Eve as both the plaintext and the MAC are encrypted
- Protects authentication above encryption
- In general, being able to modify messages is more damaging than being able to read messages (Cryptography Engineering [7.2]) 

## Generation of Initialization Vector (IV)

#### Static IV
- A static value is used as the first block of encryption mode
- Insecure as IVs are sent in plaintext,
- Same problem as with EBC

#### Counter IV
- Not very secure as incremental values (very similar) can occasionally cancel out differences in plaintext (again, very similar) and generate identical ciphertext blocks

#### Random IV
- Most secure
- The recipient has the know this value in advance
- Standard solution is to send the first block of the message as the IV (`C[0]`)
- Disadvantage is that the ciphertext is one block longer than the plaintext which is a problem for small messages

#### Nonce Generated IV
- Nonce stands for number used once, is a random number that both the parties can calculate somehow.
-  This number is then concatenated with additional information already available
- The IV is generated by encrypting this nonce
- Only requirement is that the nonce should never be reused
